---
layout: handout
title: Econ 671 Syllabus, Fall 2013
subtitle: Econometrics I
nocc: true
permalink: /671/2013/syllabus
author: Gray Calhoun
tags: 
  - handout
---

This class has three goals. You are going to study and learn some
fundamental techniques in econometrics and statistics so that you can
use them in your future research. You are also going to learn some of
the basic theoretical concepts in econometrics so that you can
understand new techniques when you encounter them in future classes
and later in your career. Finally, you're going to learn how to use a
computer to do statistical and econometric analysis.

Contact information
-------------------

If you have questions about the course material, the best times to
address them are in the scheduled lectures or during office hours. We
can probably resolve questions or concerns about the course
administration over email, but if you have urgent questions please
call me or stop by my office.

* Instructor:
    * Gray Calhoun
    * <gcalhoun@iastate.edu>
    * 467 Heady Hall
    * (515) 294-6271
    * Office hours after lecture (11 to ~12 Tuesdays and Thursdays)
      and by appointment
* TA:
    * Shufen Chen
    * <sfchen@iastate.edu>
    * 80C Heady Hall
    * Office hours TBD.

The course homepage is <http://{% include main_web %}/671>. I'll post
course material there, including a copy of this syllabus.

Scheduling and grading
----------------------

The class will meet twice a week for almost two hours. The next table
lists the most important times and dates. If you have any conflicts
please let me know as soon as possible.

* Lectures: Tuesdays and Thursdays, 9:00 to 10:50 in Heady 274
* Review sessions: Fridays, 9:00 to 11:00 in Heady 274
* Homework: due every Thursday at 4:50
* Final exam: due on the last day of finals week

Your final grade will be based on homework and a take-home final exam;
each counts for 50% of your grade.

* You are allowed to work on the homework assignments in groups, but
  you must write up your own version of the answers. Specifically,
  you should not turn in an answer that is word-for-word identical to
  a classmate's. Even if the argument is essentially the same, you
  should write your own explanation of the answer. This is true for
  computer code as well.

* You are not allowed to discuss the final exam with other students at
  all; it must be entirely your own work.

The weekly review session will be used primarily for discussion of the
homework and practice questions, but will also be used to present new
material that supplements the regular lecture.

Software
--------

You need to learn how to program a computer to do statistical and
econometric analysis. We're going to use the programming language R
in this class—it is a specialized programming language that is
designed for sophisticated data analysis. It has three advantages
over other statistical packages: it is very extensible, so designing
and using new estimators is easy; the graphics it produces are
excellent; and it is free (other packages have their own advantages as
well, obviously). Also, I use R in my own research so my advice on
programming is more likely to be useful than if we were to use another
language. You can download the latest version of R from the website
<http://www.r-project.org>. There are free manuals at the same
website.

Reading
-------

The required textbooks are [Gal97][], [CB02][], [Gre12][], and
[KZ08][]. [Gal97][] is an excellent overview of probability and
asymptotic theory. [CB02][] gives a good explanation of basic
statistics. [Gre12][] will be a useful reference later in your career
and covers many econometric estimators. [KZ08][] is relatively cheap
and is also available online through the library (we have an
institutional subscription to SpringerLink, which is the publisher's
website for e-books). You may want to save pdf versions of its
chapters to your computer instead of purchasing the book from the
bookstore. You should also download and install the R package that
accompanies this book, called the *AER* package.

### Required texts

[CB02]: #R1
[Gal97]: #R1
[Gre12]: #R1
[KZ08]: #R1

<a name="R1"> </a>

* George Casella and Roger L. Berger. *Statistical
  Inference*. Duxbury, 2nd edition, 2002.

* A. Ronald Gallant. *An Introduction to Econometric
  Theory*. Princeton University Press, 1997.

* William H. Greene. *Econometric Analysis*. Prentice Hall, 7th
  edition, 2012.

* Christian Kleiber and Achim Zeileis. *Applied Econometrics with
  R*. Springer, 2008.

### Recommended Reading

Freedman (2009) covers the intuition behind regression, is less
technically demanding than the textbooks, and is exceptionally well
written and insightful. Miller (2005) explains how to write up and
present empirical research. Miller has written another book (2004,
*The Chicago Guide to Writing about Numbers*) but all of its material
is contained in Miller (2005). Tufte (1990, 2001) discusses effective
statistical graphics and maps for displaying data. Polya (1945)
discusses mathematical problem solving.

* David A. Freedman. *Statistical Models: Theory and
  practice*. Cambridge University Press, revised edition, 2009.

* Jane E. Miller. *The Chicago Guide to Writing about Multivariate
  Analysis*. University of Chicago Press, 2005.

* George Polya. *How to Solve It*. Princeton University Press, 1945.

* Edward R. Tufte. *Envisioning Information*. Graphics Press, 1990.

* Edward R. Tufte. *The Visual Display of Quantitative
  Information*. Graphics Press, 2nd edition, 2001.
  
You'll be required to buy Hayashi (2000) next semester, so you may
want to buy it now as another source of material (it uses Generalized
Method of Moments as an organizing principle for this material).
Bruce Hansen [has a free Econometrics textbook on his
website][Hansen]. I'm also in the process of converting my lecture
notes into a textbook, but it is quite disorganized now and is
unlikely to be much help; [source code][EFLPtex] and [pdfs][EFLPpdf]
are available on GitHub (also see <http://www.econometricslibrary.org>).

[Hansen]: http://www.ssc.wisc.edu/~bhansen/econometrics/
[EFLPtex]: https://github.com/EconometricsLibrary/CoreEconometricsText
[EFLPpdf]: https://github.com/EconometricsLibrary/CoreEconometricsText/releases

* EFLP. *Econometrics Core*. Econometrics Free Library Project,
  <http://www.econometricslibrary.org>, in progress.

* Fumio Hayashi. *Econometrics*. Princeton University Press, 2000.

* Bruce Hansen. *Econometrics*.  Available at
  <http://www.ssc.wisc.edu/~bhansen/econometrics/>, in progress.
  
I am going to assume that you've taken undergraduate Econometrics when
I teach the class. If you haven't, or if it's rusty, you may want to
consult an undergraduate textbook for a less technical introduction to
some of the material. Wooldridge (2012) is a good option. If you have
not taken even an introductory statistics class (covering basic
probability, sample averages, t-tests, etc.) you should buy and read
Freedman, Pisani, and Purves (2007) ASAP (you can read it this
weekend).  You may want to purchase older editions of these books
since they are somewhat expensive.

* David A. Freedman, Robert Pisani, and Roger
  Purves. *Statistics*. W.W. Norton & Company, fourth edition, 2007.

* Jeffrey M. Wooldridge. *Introductory Econometrics: A modern
  approach*. Thomson Southwestern, fifth edition, 2012.

This would also be a good time for you to begin reading the *Journal
of Economic Literature* and paying attention to working papers in your
field announced at <http://nep.repec.org>.

### Other reading

You should try to understand many different approaches to data
analysis and modeling. These books span several different philosophies
and make excellent vacation reading (many of these authors have other
books that I'd also recommend, but it's a long list as is). In
alphabetical order:

* Joshua D. Angrist and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. *Mostly harmless
  Econometrics: An empiricist's companion*. Princeton University
  Press, 2009. (Also see the symposium in the Spring, 2010 issue of
  the *Journal of Economic Perspectives* and the articles in the June,
  2010 issue of the *Journal of Economic Literature*.)

* William S. Cleveland. *Visualizing Data*. Hobart Press, 1993.

* Andrew Gelman and Jennifer Hill. *Data Analysis Using Regression
  and Multilevel/Hierarchical Models*. Cambridge University Press, 2006.
  
* John Geweke. *Complete and Incomplete Econometric Models*.
  Princeton University Press, 2010.

* Frank E. Harrell. *Regression Modeling Strategies*. Springer, 2001.

* Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman. *The
  Elements of Statistical Learning*. Springer, 2nd Edition, 2009.
  Also available online (with supplemental material) at
  <http://www-stat.stanford.edu/~tibs/ElemStatLearn/>

* Charles F. Manski. *Identification for Prediction and Decision*.
  Harvard University Press, 2007.

* Paul R. Rosenbaum. *Design of Observational Studies*.  Springer, 2010.

Course Material
---------------

I'll assign specific readings before each lecture during the semester.
This is a tentative and optimistic plan:

### Probability, lectures 1–4

This section's material is covered in: [Gal97][] chapters 1–3;
[CB02][] chapters 1, 2, and 4; and [Gre12][] appendix B.

* Introduction (1, 2)
* Expectation (3)
* Multiple random variables (4)

### Point estimation, lectures 5–11

Covered in: [CB02][] chapters 3, 5–7, and 9; and [Gre12][] chapters 2
and 4 and appendix C.

* Introduction (5)
* Point estimation (6–8)
* Confidence intervals (9–10)
* Finite sample optimality (11)

### Inference, lectures 12–16

Covered in: [CB02][] chapters 8 and 9; and [Gre12][] chapters 5 and 16
and appendix C.

* Introduction (12)
* Likelihood Ratio Test (13)
* Power and optimality (14)
* Bayesian statistics (15)
* Bayesian linear regression (16)

### Asymptotic statistics, lectures 17–23

Covered in: [Gal97][] chapter 4, [CB02][] chapters 5 and 10, and
[Gre12][] chapter 4 and appendix D

* Convergence of random variables and estimators (17)
* Law of Large Numbers (18)
* Central Limit Theorem (19)
* Asymptotics for linear regression (20)
* Distribution under local alternatives (21)
* Asymptotic efficiency (22)
* Bootstrap (23): [Pol98][], [Hor01][], 1–3

### Understanding linear regression

Read [Fis26][], [Fre91][], and [Ros05][] for general background (over
Thanksgiving break, if not earlier) and [Gre12][] chapters 1–10 (some
chapters are tied to specific lectures, some are not) as well as the
following papers.

* Algebraic and geometric properties of OLS (24)
* Predictions and functional form (25)
* Identification and causality (26): [IW07][] Lecture 1, [Rub08][];
  [CK94][]
* Model selection (27): [LP05][]
* Multiple hypothesis testing (28): [RSW08][], [RS09][]
* Endogeneity and IV (29): [IW07][] Lecture 5
* Summary (30, time permitting)

[CK94]: #R3
[Fis26]: #R3
[Fre91]: #R3
[Hor01]: #R3
[IW07]: #R3
[LP05]: #R3
[Pol98]: #R3
[Ros05]: #R3
[RS09]: #R3
[RSW08]: #R3
[Rub08]: #R3

### Additional references

<a name="R3"> </a> 

* **CK94:** David E. Card and Alan B. Krueger. Minimum Wages and
  Employment: A Case Study of the Fast-Food Industry in New Jersey
  and Pennsylvania. *American Economic Review*, 84:772–793, 1994.
  <http://ideas.repec.org/a/aea/aecrev/v84y1994i4p772-93.html>

* **Fis26:** Ronald A. Fisher. The arrangement of field
  experiments. *Journal of the Ministry of Agriculture of Great
  Britain*, 33:503–513, 1926.
  <http://digital.library.adelaide.edu.au/dspace/handle/2440/15191>

* **Fre91:** David A. Freedman. Statistical models and shoe leather.
  *Sociological Methodology*, 21:291–313, 1991.
  <http://www.jstor.org/stable/270939>

* **Hor01:** Joel L. Horowitz. The bootstrap. *Handbook of econometrics*,
  5:3159–3228, 2001. <http://ideas.repec.org/h/eee/ecochp/5-52.html>

* **ImW07:** Guido W. Imbens and Jeffrey M. Wooldridge. *Lecture notes
  for "What's new in Econometrics?"* Available online,
  <http://www.nber.org/WNE/WNEnotes.pdf> 2007.

* **LP05:** Hannes Leeb and Benedikt M. Pötscher. Model selection and
  inference: Facts and fiction. *Econometric Theory* 21(1):21–59, 2005.
  <http://ideas.repec.org/a/cup/etheor/v21y2005i01p21-59_05.html>

* **Pol98:** Dimitris N. Politis. Computer-intensive methods in
  statistical analysis. *Signal Processing Magazine, IEEE,*
  15(1):39–55, 1998.  <http://math.ucsd.edu/~politis/SPprimer-289.pdf>

* **RSW08:** Joseph P. Romano, Azeem M. Shaikh, and Michael
  Wolf. Formalized data snooping based on generalized error
  rates. *Econometric Theory*, 24(2):404–447, 2008.
  <http://ideas.repec.org/a/cup/etheor/v24y2008i02p404-447_08.html>

* **Ros05:** Paul R. Rosenbaum. Observational study. *Encyclopedia of
  Statistics in Behavioral Science*, 3:1451–1462, 2005.
  <http://www-stat.wharton.upenn.edu/~rosenbap/BehStatObs.pdf>

* **RS09:** Paul R. Rosenbaum and Jeffrey H. Silber. Sensitivity
  analysis for equivalence and difference in an observational study of
  Neonatal Intensive Care Units. *Journal of the American Statistical
  Association*, 104, 501–511.
  <http://www-stat.wharton.upenn.edu/~rosenbap/senequivdif.pdf>

* **Rub08:** Donald B. Rubin. For objective causal inference, design
  trumps analysis. *Annals of Applied Statistics*, 2(3):808–840, 2008.
  <http://arxiv.org/abs/0811.1640>

University policies
-------------------

{% include university-policies.md %}
