---
layout: handout
title: Econ 102 Syllabus, Spring 2013
subtitle: Principles of Macroeconomics, Gray Calhoun
nocc: true
permalink: /102/2013/syllabus
tags: 
  - handout
---

This class has two main goals. It will train you to better understand
global and national Macroeconomic events (recessions, expansions,
etc.), including the recent financial crisis and the current economic
slump.  And it will also give you the necessary background for future
classes in Economics and Business.

The course is divided into three parts:

1. The U.S. Macroeconomy overall: what the important series are and
   how recessions and expansions propegate.

2. How macroeconomic policy is conducted, given what we discussed in
   the first part of the course.

3. Issues relevant to international (open-economy) Macroeconomics:
   long-run economic growth; capital flows and trade between countries;
   and exchange rates.

The first two parts will be followed by midterm exams and the last
part will be followed by the final.

Contact information 
-------------------

The class meets Monday, Wednesday, and Friday from 2:10 to 3:00 in
Coover 2245 and my office hours are Monday and Wednesday from 3:00 to
4:00 in Heady 467.  The TAs' office hours haven't been set
yet but will be announced on Blackboard Learn when they are available.
If you have questions about the course material, the best times to
address them are in the scheduled lectures or during office hours. We
can probably resolve questions or concerns about the course
administration over email, but if you have urgent questions please
stop by my office.  The next table lists basic contact information for
the instructor (me) and TAs:

* Instructor: Gray Calhoun
  * <gcalhoun@iastate.edu>
  * OH 3-4 MW in Heady 467
* TAs (OH will be listed later)
  * Shufen Chen, <sfchen@iastate.edu>; OH: 4-5 MW (80c Heady Hall)
  * Nathan Miller, <nathan89@iastate.edu>; OH: 2-3 MW, 9:30-10:30 TuTh (help room).
  * Soumyadip Roy, <sroy30@iastate.edu>; OH: 12-1 MW (80a Heady Hall)
  * Donggyu Yi, <dgyi@iastate.edu>; OH: 2-3:30 TuTh (280d Heady Hall)

If you can not make our regularly scheduled office hours, we'll all be
happy to schedule other appointments by email.

I will use [BlackBoard Learn](https://bb.its.iastate.edu) to
distribute grades, announcements, and handouts before each class.  This
syllabus will also be available on my website at
<http://gray.clhn.co/handouts/2013/econ-102-syllabus.html>.

Grades
------

Your course grade will be based on three exam grades; homework is
optional, but doing practice exercises is the best way to understand
and learn the material and do well on the exams.  I will also give
opportunities in class for students to earn extra credit.

* Midterm 1: 30% of grade
  - February 22
  - covers ch. 6-8 and 10-12
* Midterm 2: 30% of grade
  - April 12th
  - covers ch. 13-17
* Final exam: 40% of grade
  - May 7th, 12-2pm
  - covers ch. 6-17, 19

The "chapters covered" refers to the required textbook,
*Macroeconomics* by Paul Krugman and Robin Wells.  I do not give make
up exams, but we can make arrangements if you have a legitimate reason
for missing a test.

Textbooks
---------

### Required
There is one required text that the lectures will follow closely:

* [Macroeconomics, Third
  edition](http://bcs.worthpublishers.com/krugmanwellsmacro3), by Paul
  Krugman and Robin Wells.  The third edition has some new material on
  the recent financial crisis.

### Recommended
The next books are not required but are useful.  Both use less math
and provide different perspectives than the textbook.

* [The Little Book of Economics](http://gregip.wordpress.com/), by
  Greg Ip. This book describes Macroeconomics with very few equations,
  charts, or graphs.  It also talks about the recent financial
  crisis. This book can help if you want to understand how the topics
  covered by the textbook and lectures apply to current events.

* [Diary of a Very Bad Year: Confessions of an Anonymous Hedge Fund
    Manager](http://shop.nplusonemag.com/products/diary-of-a-very-bad-year-confessions-of-an-anonymous-hedge-fund-manager),
    by Keith Gessen.  This book comes from a series of interviews that
    the editor of a literary journal (n+1) did with a hedge fund
    manager during the recent financial crisis.

### News and current events
Macroeconomics has dominated the news lately.  You are not required to
follow current events in this class, but you may find doing so
interesting and useful.  The following sources have particularly
strong coverage of Economics:

* [The Financial Times](http://www.ft.com), a daily newspaper.

* [The Economist](http://www.economist.com), a weekly news magazine.

University policies
-------------------

{% include university-policies.md %}
