---
layout: blog
title: Identification in Macro
---

A student made the following comment about the
[conclusion of my Reinhart and Rogoff post][RR post]:
"Looking at the data in order to determine your identification
strategy seems pretty suspicious to me."

So I have a few thoughts on this.  First, I’m sympathetic to the
general idea; choosing a model after you’ve seen the data is a good
way to fit your model to noise and spurious artifacts of the dataset,
and well-run experiments try to minimize this sort of contamination
(through double-blind, etc).  But that’s not really an option in Macro
because there’s only one dataset (even if you view the individual
countries as different datasets, they’re highly interdependent: there
was only one Great Depression; there’s been only one global financial
crisis; and so on).

One consequence is that formal statistical tests, the kind that I
devote an enormous amount of time studying and teaching, have very
little influence on Macro theory.  You can see this throughout the
development of the RBC-style microfoundation literature, for example.
Macro develops in phases: there are relatively calm periods where
people tinker with and build on whatever models are established and in
fashion; and there are periods of crisis or near-crisis that highlight
the shortcomings of those models: the Great Depression; the Great
Inflation; Japan’s lost decade; the global financial crisis; etc.  A
lot of existing models get thrown out when the crisis reveals that
they’re missing important aspects of the economy (or are just fragile)
and then new models get proposed and developed following the crisis.
So you should view almost all of Macro as exploratory analysis and the
behavior during a new crisis as potentially confirmatory analysis.
It’s unfortunate that most journals require a veneer of statistical
inference before they’ll publish this exploratory analysis, but that
doesn’t change it’s fundamental nature.

It would be interesting to try to formalize this approach as an actual
experimental strategy, but I have almost no idea how you’d do it.

And remember, it’s usually not the established researchers that are
going to develop this new theory, it’s the current grad students,
future grad students, and a few professors at various stages in their
careers.  So this process doesn’t require any established economist to
change his or her mind (thank god).

[RR post]: http://pseudotrue.com/2013/04/24/some-thoughts-on-the-reinhart-and-rogoff-debate/