---
layout: handout
title: Econ 102 Syllabus, Spring 2014 (section 4)
subtitle: Principles of Macroeconomics, Gray Calhoun
nocc: true
permalink: /102/2014/syllabus4
tags: 
  - handout
---

This class has two main goals. It will train you to better understand
global and national Macroeconomic events (recessions, expansions,
etc.), including the recent financial crisis and the current economic
slump.  And it will also give you the necessary background for future
classes in Economics and Business.

The course is divided into three parts:

1. The U.S. Macroeconomy overall: what the important series are and
   how recessions and expansions propegate.

2. How macroeconomic policy is conducted, given what we discussed in
   the first part of the course.

3. Issues relevant to international (open-economy) Macroeconomics:
   long-run economic growth; capital flows and trade between countries;
   and exchange rates.

The first two parts will be followed by midterm exams and the last
part will be followed by the final.

**This is important:** I am teaching two sections of Econ 102 this
semester; they both meet MWF and they both meet in the same room of
the same building. Please make sure that you use the correct syllabus.

Contact information 
-------------------

The class meets Monday, Wednesday, and Friday from 2:10 to 3:00 in
Gilman 1002 and my office hours are Monday and Wednesday from 12:00 to
12:45 in Heady 467.  The TAs' office hours haven't been set yet but
will be announced on Blackboard Learn when they are available.  If you
have questions about the course material, the best times to address
them are in the scheduled lectures or during office hours. We can
probably resolve questions or concerns about the course administration
over email, but if you have urgent questions please stop by my office.
The next table lists basic contact information for the instructor (me)
and TAs:

* Instructor: Gray Calhoun
  * <gcalhoun@iastate.edu>
  * Office hours 12–12:45 MW in Heady 467
* TAs
  * Ms. Shufen Chen
    * <sfchen@iastate.edu>
    * Office hours 10–11 W in Heady 180
  * Mr. James Whitmore
    * <jwhit@iastate.edu>
    * Office hours 12–1 MWF and 11–11:30 TuTh in Heady 180
  * Mr. Soumyadip Roy
    * <sroy30@iastate.edu>
    * Office hours 11-1 W in Heady 78
  * Mr. Yoonho Choi
    * <ecoyoon@iastate.edu>
    * Office hours 10–12 F in Heady 169

If you can not make our regularly scheduled office hours, we'll all be
happy to schedule other appointments by email.

I will use [BlackBoard Learn](https://bb.its.iastate.edu) to
distribute grades, announcements, and handouts.  This syllabus will
also be available on my website at
<http://gray.clhn.co/102/2014/syllabus4>.

Grades
------

Your course grade will be based on three exams and homework
assignments. The exams will be administered at the ELO testing center,
see <http://www.elo.iastate.edu/online-testing-center/>, and we will
discuss the tests in more detail as they get closer. I will also give
opportunities in class for students to earn extra credit.

* Homework: 20% of grade
* Midterm 1: 20% of grade
  - available February 17th through 21st
  - covers ch. 6-8 and 10-12
* Midterm 2: 20% of grade
  - available April 7th through 11th
  - covers ch. 13-17
* Final exam: 40% of grade
  - available May 2nd and 5th through 9th
  - covers ch. 6-17, 19

The "chapters covered" refers to the required textbook,
*Macroeconomics* by Paul Krugman and Robin Wells.

Textbooks
---------

### Required
There is one required text that the lectures will follow closely:

* [Macroeconomics, Third
  edition](http://bcs.worthpublishers.com/krugmanwellsmacro3), by Paul
  Krugman and Robin Wells.  The third edition has some new material on
  the recent financial crisis.

### Recommended
The next books are not required but are useful.  Both use less math
and provide different perspectives than the textbook.

* [The Little Book of Economics, 2nd edition](http://gregip.wordpress.com/),
  by Greg Ip. This book describes Macroeconomics with very few
  equations, charts, or graphs.  It also talks about the recent
  financial crisis. This book can help if you want to understand how
  the topics covered by the textbook and lectures apply to current
  events.

* [Diary of a Very Bad Year: Confessions of an Anonymous Hedge Fund
  Manager](http://shop.nplusonemag.com/products/diary-of-a-very-bad-year-confessions-of-an-anonymous-hedge-fund-manager),
  by Keith Gessen.  This book comes from a series of interviews that
  the editor of a literary journal (n+1) did with a hedge fund manager
  during the recent financial crisis.

### News and current events
Macroeconomics has dominated the news lately.  You are not required to
follow current events in this class, but you may find doing so
interesting and useful.  The following sources have particularly
strong coverage of Economics:

* [The Financial Times](http://www.ft.com), a daily newspaper.

* [The Economist](http://www.economist.com), a weekly news magazine.

Continuous improvement initiative
---------------------------------

As part of the university's and department's "continuous improvement
initiative," all sections of Economics 102 are measuring two learning
objectives in particular this academic year:

1. Students will learn the concept of “Gross Domestic Product” (GDP)
   and will be able to calculate the value of GDP by the expenditure
   approach, given values of GDP components.

2. Students will learn the concept of “Employment,” “Unemployment,”
   “Labor Force,” and “Not in the Labor Force” and will be able to
   classify an individual with given characteristics as “employed,”
   “unemployed,” or “not in the labor force.”  Furthermore, students
   will be able to calculate the rate of unemployment.

University policies
-------------------

{% include university-policies.md %}
