---
title: Econ 674 Syllabus, Spring 2013
layout: default
---

Macroeconometrics is important; this class will help you get started.
The semester will be split into three parts.  Gray Calhoun will teach
the first and third part and Helle Bunzel will teach the middle part.
So this syllabus mainly applies to the first four weeks of the
semester and you may be given supplemental syllabi later on.  There is
no assigned textbook for the class, but the textbooks assigned for the
core Econometrics sequence cover some of the material.

Contact information 
-------------------

If you have questions about the course material, the best times to
address them are in the scheduled lectures or during office hours.  We
can probably resolve questions or concerns about the course
administration over email, but if you have urgent questions please
call me or stop by my office..

<table class="table">
  <tr>
    <td>Instructor</td> 
    <td>Gray Calhoun</td>
    <td>OH: 3-4 Mondays and Wednesdays</td>
    <td>gcalhoun@iastate.edu</td>
    <td>467 Heady Hall</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Instructor</td>
    <td>Helle Bunzel</td>
    <td>OH: TBD</td>
    <td>hbunzel@iastate.edu</td>
    <td>373 Heady Hall</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>TA</td>
    <td>Xiying Liu</td>
    <td>OH: 3-4 Tuesdays</td>
    <td>xiyingl@iastate.edu</td>
    <td>280D Heady Hall</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
</table>

Grading
-------

Your final grade for the semester will be based on an original
research paper due in July.  You will be required to submit a proposal
and a first draft during the semester, and Helle or I will discuss
your proposal with you after you submit it.  Your course grade will be
listed as "incomplete" until you turn in the paper, and the quality of
the proposal and the first draft will factor into your grade on the
paper.

<dl>
  <dt>Paper proposal due</dt>
  <dd>March 25th</dd>

  <dt>First draft of paper due</dt>
  <dd>May 3rd</dd>

  <dt>Final draft of paper due</dt>
  <dd>July 15th</dd>
</dl>

Course outline
--------------

The first four weeks will cover basic time series concepts--weak
dependence concepts, stationarity, ARMA models, etc.--as well as
vector autoregressions (VARs).  The next seven and a half weeks will
cover special issues introduced by economic time series: deterministic
and stochastic trends in the data, variance estimation in the presence
of serial correlation, and bootstrapping dependent processes, among
other topics.  The remaining three and a half weeks will cover
macroeconometric modeling: estimation of DSGE models and
cointegration.  References will be supplied throughout the semester.

University policies
-------------------

The following policies apply to *every* course at Iowa State
University. They are listed here for your convenience and reference.

### Academic dishonesty

The class will follow Iowa State University's policy on academic
dishonesty.  Anyone suspected of academic dishonesty will be reported
to the Dean of Students Office,
<http://www.dso.iastate.edu/ja/academic/misconduct.html>.

### Disability accommodation

This material can be provided to you in alternative format. Anyone who
anticipates difficulties with the content or format of the course due
to a physical or learning disability should see me immediately in
order to work out a plan. You may also want to contact the Disability
Resources (DR) office, located on the main floor of the Student
Services Building, Room 1076 or call them at 515-294-7220.

### Dead week

For academic programs, the last week of classes is considered to be a
normal week in the semester except that in developing their syllabi
faculty shall consider the following guidelines:

* Mandatory final examinations in any course may not be given during
  Dead Week except for laboratory courses and for those classes
  meeting once a week only and for which there is no contact during
  the normal final exam week. Take home final exams and small quizzes
  are generally acceptable. (For example, quizzes worth no more than
  10 percent of the final grade and/or that cover no more than
  one-fourth of assigned reading material in the course could be
  given).

* Major course assignments should be assigned prior to Dead Week
  (major assignments include major research papers, projects,
  etc.). Any modifications to assignments should be made in a timely
  fashion to give students adequate time to complete the assignments.

* Major course assignments should be due no later than the Friday
  prior to Dead Week. Exceptions include class presentations by
  students, semester-long projects such as a design project in lieu of
  a final, and extensions of the deadline requested by students.

### Harassment and discrimination

Iowa State University strives to maintain our campus as a place of
work and study for faculty, staff, and students that is free of all
forms of prohibited discrimination and harassment based upon race,
ethnicity, sex (including sexual assault), pregnancy, color, religion,
national origin, physical or mental disability, age, marital status,
sexual orientation, gender identity, genetic information, or status as
a U.S. veteran. Any student who has concerns about such behavior
should contact his/her instructor, Student Assistance at 515-294-1020,
or the Office of Equal Opportunity and Compliance at 515-294-7612.

### Religious accommodation

If an academic or work requirement conflicts with your religious
practices and/or observances, you may request reasonable
accommodations. Your request must be in writing, and your instructor
or supervisor will review the request.  You or your instructor may
also seek assistance from the Dean of Students Office or the Office of
Equal Opportunity and Compliance.

### Contact information

If you feel that any of your rights as a student have been violated,
please email <academicissues@iastate.edu>.

This syllabus is in the public domain. You may copy and reuse it as you see fit
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
To the extent possible under law, Gray Calhoun (the author) has waived
all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this work.

<a rel="license"
 href="http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/">
 <img src="http://i.creativecommons.org/p/zero/1.0/88x31.png" style="border-style: none;" alt="CC0" />
</a>
